Booting in C

What is a boot loader?

Boot loader is a program that loads an operating system (usually, although boot loader can be used for other purposes). 
It is loaded into operating memory from persistent memory, such as a hard drive or whatever else.

Bare Metal?

Bare-metal stands for bare-metal programming. We will not use any layers of abstraction such as GRUB loader or C language 
or operating system (we don’t have it at this step). We will use Assembly language (nasm compiler) and that’s it. 
We will interact with a system at the hardware level.

BIOS?

For IBM PC-compatible computers, BIOS is non-volatile firmware (Firmware is a software program permanently etched 
into a hardware device such as a keyboards, hard drive, BIOS, or video cards. It is a software that provides the low-level
control of a device's specific hardware.) used to perform hardware initialization during the booting process 
(power-on startup), and to provide runtime services for operating systems and programs. 
The BIOS firmware comes pre-installed on a personal computer’s system board, and it is the first software run 
when powered on.

What does it mean for us as “boot loader” developers?

It means that we already have some software on our PC which runs in the first place and we need to integrate with it. 
So, let’s start with getting to know what happens in there by pressing the Power button (short story).

You pressed the Power button…
LED on your computer blinks…
BIOS prepares to call POST procedure…

POST stands for Power-On-Self-Test and the purposes of this procedure are simple — check if everything works correctly.
The interesting part here is where this sequence leads us to. This sequence of POST procedures culminates in locating a 
bootable device, such as a floppy disk, cd-rom, hard disk or usb stick, whatever.

- A BIOS is a special program that is embedded in BIOS chip.
- The BIOS program is executed which in turn performs the following tasks.
- Runs Power On self Test.
- Checks the clocks and various buses available.
- Checks system clock and hardware information in CMOS RAM
- Verifies system settings, hardware settings pre-configured etc.,
- Tests the attached hardware starting from devices like RAM, disk drives, optical drives, hardware drives and so on.
- Depending upon the pre-configured information in BIOS Bootable devices information, it searches 
for a boot drive based on the information available in the settings and starts initializing it to proceed further.

How does BIOS recognize a device as bootable?

Turns out, by magic numbers. These numbers are 0x55 and 0xAA, or 85 and 170 in decimal appropriately. 
Also, these magic numbers must be located exactly in bytes 511 and 512 in our bootable device.
You already got it; these magic numbers are just markers for BIOS that help to identify bootable 
devices from other devices.
When the BIOS finds such a boot sector, it loads it into memory at a specific address — 0x0000:0x7C00.

What is a bootable device?

A device is bootable device if it contains a boot sector or boot block and bios reads that device by 
first loading the boot sector into memory (RAM) for execution and then proceeds further.

What is a sector?

A sector is a specifically sized division of a bootable disk. Usually a sector is of 512 bytes in size. 

What is a boot sector?

A boot sector or a boot block is a region on a bootable device that contains machine code to be loaded into RAM 
by a computer system’s built-in firmware during its initialization. It is of 512 bytes on a floppy disk.

How does a bootable device work?

Whenever a bootable device is initialized, bios searches and loads the 1st sector which is known as boot sector 
or boot block into the RAM and starts executing it. Whatever the code resides inside a boot sector is the first 
program you may edit to define the functionality of the computer for the rest of the time. What I mean here is 
you can write your own code and copy it to the boot sector to make the computer work in accordance with your 
requisites. The program code that you intend to write to the boot sector of a device is also called as boot loader.

What is a Boot Loader?

In computing, a boot loader is a special program that is executed each time a bootable device is initialized 
by the computer during its power on or reset. It is an executable machine code, which is very specific to the 
hardware architecture of the type of CPU or microprocessor.

What is Real Mode?

Earlier in section “What happens when a computer boots”, I have mentioned that all x86 CPUs while booting from 
a device start in a real mode. It is very important to make a note of this while writing a boot code for any device. 
Real mode supports only 16-bit instructions. So the code you write to load into a boot record or boot sector of a device 
should be compiled to only 16 bit compatible code.

What are registers?

Registers are like utilities of a microprocessor to store data temporarily and manipulate it as per our requirements. 
Suppose say if the user wants to add 3 with 2, the user asks the computer to store number 3 in one register and number
 2 in more register and then add the contents of the these two registers and the result is placed in another register 
 by the CPU which is the output that we desire to see. There are four types of registers and are listed below.

General purpose registers
Segment registers
Stack registers
Index registers

Let me brief you about each of the types.

General purpose registers: These are used to store temporary data required by the program during its lifecycle. 
Each of these registers is 16 bit wide or 2 bytes long.

AX - the accumulator register
BX - the base address register
CX - the count register
DX - the data register

Segment Registers: To represent a memory address to a microprocessor, there are two terms we need to be aware of:

Segment: It is usually the beginning of the block of a memory.
Offset: It is the index of memory block onto it.

Example: Suppose say, there is a byte whose value is 'X' that is present on a block of memory whose start address 
is 0x7c00 and the byte is located at the 10th position from the beginning. In this situation, We represent segment 
as 0x7c00 and the offset as 10. The absolute address is 0x7c00 + 10.

There are four categories that I wanted to list out.

CS - code segment
SS - stack segment
DS - data segment
ES - extended segment

But there is always a limitation with these registers. You cannot directly assign an address to these registers. 
What we can do is, copy the address to a general purpose registers and then copy the address from that register 
to the segment registers.

Stack Registers:

BP - base pointer
SP - stack pointer

Index Registers:

SI - source index register.
DI - destination index register.

AX: CPU uses it for arithmetic operations.
BX: It can hold the address of a procedure or variable (SI, DI, and BP can also). And also perform arithmetic and data movement.
CX: It acts as a counter for repeating or looping instructions.
DX: It holds the high 16 bits of the product in multiply (also handles divide operations).
CS: It holds base location for all executable instructions in a program.
SS: It holds the base location of the stack.
DS: It holds the default base location for variables.
ES: It holds additional base location for memory variables.
BP: It contains an assumed offset from the SS register. Often used by a subroutine to locate variables that were passed on the stack by a calling program.
SP: Contains the offset of the top of the stack.
SI: Used in string movement instructions. The source string is pointed to by the SI register.
DI: Acts as the destination for string movement instructions.

What are interrupts?

To interrupt the ordinary flow of a program and to process events that require prompt response we use interrupts. 
The hardware of a computer provides a mechanism called interrupts to handle events. For example, when a mouse is moved, 
the mouse hardware interrupts the current program to handle the mouse movement (to move the mouse cursor, etc.) 
Interrupts cause control to be passed to an interrupt handler. Interrupt handlers are routines that process the interrupt. 
Each type of interrupt is assigned an integer number. At the beginning of physical memory, a table of interrupt vectors 
resides that contain the segmented addresses of the interrupt handlers. The number of interrupt is essentially an index 
into this table. We can also called as the interrupt as a service offered by BIOS.

What is a function?

A function is a block of code that has a name and it has a property that it is reusable.

What is a macro?

A macro is a fragment of code, which has been given a name. Whenever the name is used, 
it is replaced by the contents of the macro.

What is the difference between a macro and a function in terms of syntax?

To call a function we use the below syntax.

push <argument>
call <function name>

To call a macro we use the below syntax

macroname <argument>

But the calling and usage syntax of the macro is very simple when compared to that 
of a function. So I preferred to write a macro and use it instead of calling a function 
in the main code. You can refer to more materials online as to how to write assembly code on GNU Assembler.

command for compiling the c file

gcc -c -g -Os -march=i686 -m32 -ffreestanding -fno-exceptions -fstrength-reduce -fomit-frame-pointer -finline-functions -Wall -Werror test.c -o test.o

What does each flag mean?

-c: It is used to compile the given source code without linking.
-g: Generates debug information to be used by GDB debugger.
-Os: optimization for code size
-march: Generates code for the specific CPU architecture (in our case i686)
-ffreestanding: A freestanding environment is one in which the standard library may not exist, and program startup 
                may not necessarily be at ‘main’.
-Wall: Enable all compiler's warning messages. This option should always be used, in order to generate better code.
-Werror: Enable warnings being treated as errors
test.c: input source file name
-o: generate object code
test.o: output object code file name.

What is a linker?

It is the final stage of compilation. The ld(linker) takes one or more object files or libraries as input and 
combines them to produce a single (usually executable) file. In doing so, it resolves references to external 
symbols, assigns final addresses to procedures/functions and variables, and revises code and data to reflect 
new addresses (a process called relocation).

Also remember that we have no standard libraries and all fancy functions to use in our code.

objcopy -O binary test.elf test.bin
This command is used to generate platform independent code. 

We use __asm__ keyword to embed assembly language statements into a C program. This keyword hints the compiler to 
recognize that it is an assembly instruction given by the user.

We also use __volatile__ to hint the assembler not to modify our code and let it as it is.

This way of embedding assembly code inside C code is called as inline assembly.

Hence, what the BIOS does is it loads 512 bytes from the drive and stores it into 0000:7C00 to 0000:7DFF, 
and then jumps to 0000:7C00 to execute the primary boot loader code.
